Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Aind and David Cruz.
There are a number of awards given to writers of science fiction and fantasy.
The two best known awards are the Hugo and the Nebula, both given annually.
But the winners are selected in very different manners.
The Hugo is voted on by people attending the World Science Fiction Convention each year,
so the selecting body would be made up mostly of fans.
And the Nebula is voted on only by members of the Science Fiction Writers of America,
in other words, the writers themselves.
The Hugo is the oldest award.
It was first given in 1953, and today there are a number of categories a writer can win in.
He can win for a novel, a novella, a novelette, or a short story.
And there are also hugos for movies, artists, editors, fan publications, and so forth.
The Nebula began in 1966, so it's a more recent award.
It's given each spring that the annual banquet of the Science Fiction Writers of America.
And that body consists of around 500 people, so the voting base for the award is much smaller than it is for the Hugo.
We asked one science fiction author, Jack Chalker, which award was the most prestigious?
The Hugo, because it's been around now so long, and it's had so much publicity,
and it's been so well promoted by the industry, is generally recognized by the regular Science Fiction Bookline public.
Most of whom do not know how the Hugo is actually given.
The fact is that I remember one Hugo winner who said that when she got on the train to go home,
she had her Hugo under her arms.
She wasn't going to let it go.
And the conductor on the train looked down and he says, isn't that a Hugo?
So, yeah. In other words, basically, obviously the conductor reads Science Fiction.
And he recognized the award, he just did not recognize.
He didn't know anything about how it was awarded or anything else, but he knows it was an enormously prestigious award.
Therefore, putting Hugo award-winning author on the front of a book means that these non-fans will recognize this as something single-added exceptional, and they will buy it.
Because it's the best-known award, Chalker says, it means a good deal of money to an author.
It's worth quite a lot of money to someone who has not won one.
I doubt it seriously whether it would mean a dime to an Azimov, or an Arthur Clark, or Robert Heinlein.
These people already have their white markets, but it means an awful lot to particularly first-time winners.
And it means that the publisher knows that by putting this on there, they're automatically going to have sales two or three times what they would have otherwise without even bothering to promote it.
And of course, you are going to promote it. It gives you promotion money as well.
Which means that I believe somebody has estimated that the minimum worth for Hugo, the minimum worth is around $50,000.
Finally, we asked his opinion on the two awards. Which would a professional writer like himself prefer to receive?
I think the Hugo is more desired. I think the Hugo is, as I say, commercially recognized.
The Nebula, unfortunately, it sounds great. It's an award given by the science fiction writers to themselves.
But because it's such a small group that does it, and because of an inordinately complex and ridiculous system of nominations and a lot of politics,
and it's not just about taking Oscar-style politics and everything else, it really boils down to cliques of friends being able to nominate themselves year after year.
And the Nebula is quite often won by a mere 40 votes.
No matter which award a story may have won, Hugo or Nebula, it'll be a good one.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Darrell Lane.
We produce the Science Fiction Radio Show because we feel that science fiction and fantasy is the most exciting and significant literature of our time.
And its popularity is more than obvious. Go into any bookstore. You'll find that the Science Fiction section is the largest one there.
And a Science Fiction movie, Star Wars, is the single greatest money earner in Hollywood history, presently reaching toward a billion dollars gross.
Our show is produced to keep you informed on what's happening in science fiction and fantasy.
We'll interview authors, for instance, both new ones and established ones.
We'll review books and movies, previewing what will be coming out, highlighting what's here now, and discussing significant work from the past.
And we'll also talk with movie producers, agents, publishers, anyone involved with science fiction and fantasy.
And scientists, too, will occasionally interview people from NASO, for instance, and other scientists working in areas such as robots and computers that current science fiction is dealing with.
We feel that science fiction is not only an exciting literature of adventure and escape, but we're convinced that it speaks to our present society in a vital and necessary way.
A new and highly popular science fiction author, C.J. Cherry, told us why she thinks science fiction and fantasy are valuable.
The value of science fiction is essentially the broadening of vision.
The broadening of vision in time, because we do not really concern ourselves only with the future.
This is why fantasy, which deals with past ages, has been quite as comfortable in associating science fiction as it has.
On the one hand, it should seem very strange to find fantasy readers and science fiction readers trading books.
We think that we had nothing to say to each other.
But in point of fact, we have all the world to say to each other.
We have all of human experience to say to each other.
We have the long view, one sort of being the memory of mankind and the other being the hope and the aspiration of where we will go and what we will do.
Two sides of the same coin.
Cherry also believes that science fiction and fantasy can put humanity into perspective, so to speak, can somehow show us our place in our common unity.
It's a kind of literature that lightens the experience beyond one's daily life.
It shows us the true size of the Earth, the true size of the universe, the true importance of our troubles.
Both the size and complexity of them and sometimes the extreme simplicity of them, it gives us perspective in dealing with the world around us and with each other.
And shows us that we have in many instances a good deal more in common than we do in difference.
Another popular science fiction writer, Frederick Poll, spoke to us on the value of science fiction.
Poll has been in the field for some 50 years, not only as a best-selling writer, but as an agent, editor and critic.
He talks about one of science fiction's unique attributes.
I think science fiction has special qualifications to act as a vehicle for discussing anything that affects the human being.
It's a way of looking at the human race from outside objectively.
It's a way of, it's a sort of game-playing mechanism for seeing what would happen to human beings under conditions that haven't occurred yet but are very possible.
And I think that that's probably one of the strongest factors accounting for the continual growth and interest in science fiction that seems to have been going on as long as I've been alive.
We'll continue next time with some more views on science fiction and fantasy.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
We'll be back with another episode of Science Fiction.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Dara Lane.
And David Cruz.
Why do people read science fiction?
We asked that question of two of science fiction's newest and most popular authors, Jack Chalker and CJ Cherry.
Jack Chalker comments first.
Why people pick up science fiction and fantasy, I think, is because first and foremost because they want an escape.
Because they really don't like...
You know, I mean, you read...
You look at the evening news, you read the papers, you know, 20 dead in El Salvador this morning.
15 house fires set by Matt Arsenault's downtown.
Rape is up, you know, all of this kind of thing.
They're scared to get out on the street in many of the cities so on these days after dark.
Seems like problems, problems, problems, unemployment lines.
And then you can pick up science fiction and fantasy and you can jump into that other world.
And you can become a part of it and you can be what's something else, be somewhere else.
So it's the ultimate escape literature.
And of course, once we've got you in the escape literature, then we sneak in the serious stuff.
CJ Cherry has many of the same ideas, but she provides a little different perspective in her answer.
It's curiosity.
It's a wish to be in touch with one's environment, one's real environment.
There are so many people who go through their daily lives concerned only with what happens in the office and what happens around them.
And it's sort of like being locked in one cell, which you never see beyond that.
Nature and the universe have so much more to it than what you perceive if you limit your vision to your immediate time and your immediate place and your immediate circumstance.
There's a certain nobility in ordinary daily affairs.
I do not deny that, but I think that the real understanding of what actually goes on in ordinary daily affairs only comes through a wider understanding of the universe as a whole.
And this is what I think draws people to science fiction, to fantasy, to this whole vast realm of a romantical or positive way of looking at the universe, which has been in the mainstream of thought since literature began.
Both Cherry and Chalker feel that science fiction or fantasy is almost impossible to define. It's such a broad, all-encompassing form that it just can't be pinned down.
Cherry, however, offers some ideas on what science fiction is.
I think the best one that ever came up was Roger's The Last Nice definition. At least I believe it's his. I don't know from whom he may have gotten it.
It's basically that if I ever discover a definition of science fiction, I shall immediately attempt to violate it.
Science fiction, to me, will always remain an experimental literature. It does not have rules, except to try to adhere to science and to prove things as much as possible and to try to have your research well-founded in at least the best possible understanding of what's going on that you can arrive at.
To me, science fiction is the same thing that the unknown writer of the Kilgamesh epic did. It avoids in search of the unknown as a source of literature.
Next time, we'll talk to some writers who go back to the pulp era of science fiction in the early part of this century.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Ayn.
John Vengey began writing in 1974 and has already won two Hugo Awards, one for the novella Eyes of Amber and most recently for her novel The Snow Queen.
The Snow Queen was Vengey's first full-length novel, and she told us that it was quite an undertaking.
That book was quite an incredible thing for me to write that book because I wound up being about, it was over 600 pages of manuscript.
It's almost 200,000 words long.
And when I started writing it, I had never written a complete novel all at once.
I'm with Outcast of Heaven Delta, I'd written the novella, and then I had increased its size to have a novel.
I was feeling kind of daunted about the very idea of writing a normal, what I thought would be a normal-length novel of about 200 pages.
But I finally did sit down and start to write it.
The more I wrote, the more I realized that it was not going to stop at 200 pages.
I think I had gotten through 100 pages and realized that I had barely gotten into the plot at all, my writing.
And from then on, I could only just go on and write and write and write and see where it led me.
It got more and more complicated as it went along until I really despaired at times that I would ever be able to finish the thing.
As in a lot of science fiction, Vengey had to create the world on which the story unfolds.
This task required her to design a believable world and the people who populated it.
She told us how she developed the background material for the main city in the story and how some of the characters evolved.
I wanted it to be a place where all kinds of cultures and all kinds of worlds came together and mixed and mingled.
In trying to make a portrait of the city, I needed a lot of different characters with a lot of different backgrounds behind them.
So I went over, I needed a new character, I went into the story and I had to figure out where it came from.
I frequently don't lay everything out before I actually start to write a book.
I have kind of a basic structure which I think is being sort of like a trellis and then the story is a line that grows up through it and fills it in and flushes it out and things.
She told us that sometimes her characters take on a life of their own.
One of the characters comes from a very advanced society, the most technologically dominant society in the book.
He started out as a walk-on character, his name is Gundelino, and he came along with one of the major characters in the book in the scene.
He just started acting up and out of his personality I kind of saw a whole cultural stereotype growing.
I realized actually part of where he came from was that I had been reading a lot of books about, I had been reading some fiction books about Romans and Britain
because I've always been fascinated by Romans and Britain as part of the archaeology thing I guess.
It was a sort of science fiction reversal where the highly cultured people are the people who too often wind up in sensory fantasies, the kind of dark and fore-the people.
And they're usually spulking around in the bushes, but they were the people who were slum and sophisticated and non-top
and the people with red hair and sequels and green eyes were running around like howling barbarians in the brush.
I thought that was a delightful twist.
Next time, more about the Snow Queen with Joan Vinci.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Dara Lane and David Carson.
Last time we discussed how Joan Vinci developed the background material for her award-winning novel, The Snow Queen.
She did an elaborate job of laying out the locale over which her story took place.
She also had some very interesting characters for the reader to enjoy.
Hans Christian Anderson wrote a fairy tale also called The Snow Queen.
We asked if she used the fairy tale as a basis for her novel.
Yes it is. As a matter of fact, that was my original inspiration for the book.
There's a cartoon and an animated movie of the Snow Queen which they occasionally show on television.
I was interested in it. I had first seen that movie when I was in about eighth grade and thought, oh this is silly.
But when I saw it again back during the 70s sometime, I realized what an interesting fairy tale it is.
The thing about most fairy tales is that they are frequently degenerate mythology.
If you know any particular amount about Near Eastern and European mythology, you see a lot of symbolic archetypes.
You see ravens and stags and the wicked stepmother and the sweet young innocence and things like that.
They all actually have their archetypes back in European and Near Eastern mythology.
Vingy's interest in Anderson's fairy tale goes beyond his retelling of an old myth.
There were some specific concepts in his story that appealed to her.
One of the criticisms of science fiction is its portrayal of women.
While designing a novel around the story in Anderson's fairy tale, Vingy chose to dispel some of those criticisms.
She explains how.
The thing that interested me especially about this particular tale was that there was no prince in it.
It's usually a prince who gets to do all the fun and exciting things like fighting the dragon and things like that.
Then waking up to the sleeping maiden and the women in the story are usually either the wicked old witch or some helpless, simple and creature.
I get sort of bored with that kind of thing.
I was very interested.
This book was quite a twist because all the main roles in it were played by women.
The basic idea of the story is that there's a little girl and a little boy who are friends.
The little boy is still on the way by the Snow Queen who is kind of an elemental goddess of winter.
Most of the story concerns the little girl's travels as she's searching for him and all the people she meets are virtually all female.
The people in positions of power in the story are women.
I thought that was quite interesting and unique.
I was in the mood to do a story in which women played major roles in the book.
I thought that was a good jumping off point for it.
Vingy's background in archaeology is probably the reason why the societies and cultures of her characters are so well developed.
The background of a character usually holds the reasons and motivations for his or her behavior.
Combine her background in archaeology with a semi-mythical society, starships and high technology, a lost lover and the quest to find that lost lover, and you've got Joan Vingy's The Snow Queen.
She commented on what she was attempting when she wrote the story.
I didn't want to write a fantasy though. I didn't want to just make it a retelling of the fairy tale.
I really wanted it to be a whole new story and I wanted it to be science fiction as well.
That's just the way my brain works. I have written a couple of fantasy stories recently.
I've always enjoyed reading fantasy as well as science fiction.
So far the majority of my work has been at least technically science fiction.
In The Snow Queen Joan Vingy has displayed her depth as a writer.
She developed a complex society but retained an interesting storyline and her story follows the main characters all over the galaxy without losing track of any of them.
Even though The Snow Queen is somewhat longer than most books, it easily holds the reader's attention.
Vingy has done a fine job with her novel and it is well deserving of its high praise and awards.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Fiction Radio Show is a production of the Fiction Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.